[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We each have a
set of experiences.
Around those experiences,
we create a scenario
or a storyline of
who we think we are
and how we think it all is.
But I'll tell you,
there's no scenario
you've created about
your own life that
is anywhere near how it is.
I know that when
I was at Harvard,
I had absolutely no
conception not only of
how my life would turn out
in the external forms of it
but of what I would be
experiencing now as a being.
Because what I experience
myself to be now
is so entirely different than
what I experienced myself
to be 16 years ago, not
just that I had a younger
body and all that, I
mean a profound change
in the universe, in what
I see in the world, what
I see in myself,
what I feel, how
I deal with every
situation that comes up.
And if somebody
said to me in 1963
you don't even begin to
know what your life's going
to be about, you have
no idea who you are,
I had already written
the scenario then.
And that scenario was a crock.
It never had anything to
do with how it turned out.
And since then, I have
written hundreds of scenarios.
And they've all been wrong.
And there comes a
point where you just
stop writing scenarios.
Like the scenario I'm a mother,
and then your child is gone.
Suddenly you're not a mother.
Or I'm a wife or a husband,
and suddenly your partner's
is separate.
Or I'm healthy, and suddenly
you find out you have cancer.
Scenario, let go, new scenario,
new scenario, new scenario,
new scenario.
And all the time behind
it is lurking just
this unfolding of law, just
the working out of stuff.
And sometimes when you're very
quiet inside, at least for me,
and I'm very quiet, I can
almost see the clock ticking.
I can almost see it working.
I can almost see how many times
I have to go through this.
This is beautiful.
But if it's something,
it's still something.
And I got to keep going through
it until it isn't anything.
And if I don't do it this life,
I'll do it in another life.
The situation you are in
at this moment, whatever
it is, whatever it is--
this is one that's so hard for
people to hear, for me to hear.
It's so easy to forget.
The situation you are in at
this moment whatever it is
is absolutely perfect.
And it boggles the
mind to see billions
of beings having billions of
life's situations every moment.
And it all is within law.
And if I understand
the game that as you
get lighter and clearer
and less attached,
you create less
and less new karma,
that karma is created
by every action that
has attachment to it or a
desire or a clinging or intent.
And finally, you stop needing
to act out of your desires.
The desires are there,
and you are here.
And action happens.
And then new karma
stops being created.
And all that results is
old karma just runs off.
And very often,
you see beings who
finished who aren't around
except for maybe a thread.
And all it's there is this
old karma running off.
I have no idea about my guru.
Was he beyond karma?
Was he working out old karma?
Was he finished?
How would I know?
You only see what you can see.
I wouldn't know one
if I stepped on it.
I know that I've stopped
asking about myself
when will I get enlightened?
I stopped counting
and measuring.
It's just an unfolding, and
I'm just a part of a process.
And I have a lot
of patience now.
And I am merely seeing
that the means and the ends
are all interwoven.
It's just a mosaic that's
just unfolding before my eye.
And the quieter I get
and the lighter I get,
the more it all gets clearer.
[MUSIC PLAYING]